Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Carson. Chad Oliver has never really been able to
devote himself fully to writing science fiction, though he's been publishing it
for over 30 years. He's also a teacher, a professor of anthropology at the
University of Texas at Austin. As is true with many science fiction authors,
Oliver's start as a writer resulted from his fascination with reading science
fiction. As a teenager, he discovered Edgar Rice Burroughs in his lush Martian
stories and tried to get his hands on everything Burroughs published. Because of
the addiction to Burroughs, one time when I was in a newsstand, I saw a copy of
the big old fat Amazing Stories. It had a cover story by Burroughs called Tiger
Girl, and also a story by Eando Binder. You remember him? Or rather, you
remember them, Earl and Otto, called Adam Link Saves the World. Anyway, I bought
the copy of Amazing because I wanted to read the Burroughs story, and I figured,
well, I might as well read all this other stuff, too. And there was a story in
there by Edmond Hamilton called Treasure on Thunder Moon, which I read and was
immediately hooked. I thought this was, you know, the greatest thing I had ever
read, maybe the greatest thing anybody had ever written. And I decided, well, by
golly, the thing to be is to be a professional writer and to write science
fiction. And I got a second-hand portable typewriter, and I taught myself to
type, and I wrote something every week between the time I was 14 and when I was
21 when I sold my first story, and sent it all off. Editors were just immensely
helpful. I never got form rejection slips, even at 14 years old. And you can
imagine the kind of junk you were writing at 14. But people like Sam Merwin, for
example, would write me little notes, you know, we can't use this but keep
trying and so forth. And in effect, what really happened was that I got hooked
on science fiction, and I just thought science fiction writers must be gods, and
I wanted to be one. And I figured that's as close to a god as I could get. So I
went at it, and I kept writing until I sold my first story. And I've sold every
one I've written since.
But Oliver was also pursuing an academic career, and he took a master's degree
in English from the University of Texas. His master's thesis was written on
magazine science fiction, the first academic thesis written on that particular
subject. With a degree in English, you might have expected Oliver to become an
English teacher or a full-time writer of science fiction. We asked him why he
didn't become either. Actually, I was briefly. After I got my MA, I taught
English at the university for one year. And there were two troubles that were
involved in that situation. From my point of view, I don't know what troubles
the students had. But the two troubles were basically that by the time I had
started to teach English, I was so much into anthropology that I already knew
that that's what I wanted to do. And I really was just teaching the English
because I had told Ransom I would. And the other aspect of it was there's
nothing like teaching freshman English for a year to convince you that that's
not what you want to do for the rest of your life. So that was the end of it. I
left, then went to UCLA to graduate school in anthropology. I know that doesn't
answer the question about why I didn't become a full-time professional writer,
but I'm not sure I can answer that question. And Tony Boucher once said to me,
sooner or later, you're going to have to choose. And I never did. And I suppose
that one reason was that I was, particularly at that time, when I was, you know,
100 years younger than I am now, I was just as interested in anthropology as I
was in writing. And I really wanted to teach anthropology. And so I tried to do
both, doubtless, within different success. More with science fiction author Chad
Oliver next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson and Daryl Lane. Chad Oliver has been publishing science
fiction for more than three decades. His novels include Shadows in the Sun, The
Winds of Time, The Shores of Another Sea, and Giants in the Dust. He's also had
a couple of short story collections published, but he's always had to do his
writing in his spare time. Professional anthropologist. He teaches anthropology
at the University of Texas at Austin, and he's also chairman of the anthropology
department. Actually, I was chairman of the department of anthropology from 1967
to 1971. And when I resigned, I swore I would never do it again under any
circumstances whatsoever. And so here I am in the third year of my second
chairmanship, and I figure I've got one year to go, and then somebody else is
going to take over. And hopefully I can get back to writing, not on a full-time
basis, but I can sure write more than I can when I'm tied up with the
chairmanship. It's really a full-time job. With a distinguished career at the
University, Oliver still spends time writing science fiction. We asked him why?
For the money? No, I really think that writing is something you have to do. And
at any rate, that's the way it is with me. When I go a certain length of time
without writing anything or trying to write something, I get actually physically
uncomfortable. And it's definitely a labor of love. I think of myself as an
anthropologist who occasionally writes a story. I think that way down the
street, wherever it is I really live, what I am is a writer who got interested
in anthropology rather than the other way around. And it means more to me, I
think. It's more gratifying to me than anything else I'd say. I just told a
story to Analog, a story called "Ghost Town". It's going to be out in either the
September or October issue. And I was thrilled when Analog did it. And it's
almost like I'd never told a story before. And it's infinitely important than
the other things that I did to me.
Oliver is recognized for his use of anthropology and science fiction, and is
probably the first science fiction author to do so. He's even had one of his
novels, Shadows in the Sun, reviewed in an anthropology journal. We asked him if
the use of anthropology was deliberate. To some extent, but it was certainly
nothing that I sat down and planned. You know, like, here's an effective way to
teach anthropology, that I'm going to do it through science fiction. I really
think that the actual truth of the situation is that any writer writes about all
the things that they know. And one of the things that I knew was anthropology.
So it's more or less natural that a fair amount of my opinion is rooted in
anthropology. But by no means all of it. And it's too short of it. Particularly
the stories that I like the most. I don't know whether anybody else likes it. It's kind of a story that doesn't have
to be about anthropology at all. Although, you know, I don't even go on about this.
But at the point of the influence that you can frequently ask much at the same time,
and I'm just going to start with a question.
Among them, what does it mean to be human?
Where are we going and where are we going?
And it seems to me that if you're involved seriously in the field, you tend to fall into the other one.
I would guess, I don't know whether anybody's ever actually counted it up.
But I suppose something like 50% of my
perhaps is rooted directly in anthropology. But 50% it isn't. We'll continue
talking with Chad Oliver on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
The idea is to have mankind start fresh, to see if he'll make the same mistakes
or take some alternate evolutionary path. With that plan in mind, the humans are
left on the planet with no technological aid whatsoever. Varnum himself is a
throwback, a tough hunter who hasn't succumbed to the softness and lethargy of
the rest of humanity. When the humans reach the point where they begin to
domesticate animals and practice agriculture, Varnum stops them. We asked Oliver
why. Wouldn't Varnum's action and effect prevent civilization from developing?
Well, actually, the funny thing about Giants in the Dust, there are lots of
funny things about Giants in the Dust, including the fact that that's not my
title. And I haven't the faintest idea of what Giants in the Dust means in the
context of that particular novel. I called it Go Back, Go Back. But it's about a
kind of anthropology that most people are not familiar with. You know, almost
all the anthropology in science fiction comes out, really, of the old Franz Boas
Ruth Benedict cultural relativism position. And there's a whole new school in
anthropology, if you can call it a school, and not just in anthropology, because
it gets into sociobiology and all sorts of things, which states, in effect, you
know, that there's more to human beings at birth than just being the traditional
tabula rasa, that there's some things built in. And what I was trying to do in
Giants in the Dust, or what was going on there, was really to take the old deal
about, suppose you took 50 people, 25 male, 25 female, and you cast them away on
the traditional desert island. What would happen to them if they could somehow
survive from infancy and grow into adulthood? And one possibility that hasn't
been considered is that we have a kind of culture-building device within us, and
that we would recreate a good deal of culture much more quickly than is usually
assumed. And I was playing around with that idea in Giants in the Dust. And the
reason why Varnum stops these various inventions and things is because he wants
to give it time to unfold to see what will happen. But you may recall Varnum's
the only character in the book who retains any memory. And at the end of the
book, he finally decides that ethically, the only thing he can do is to tell
him, tell the other people, what he remembers of the culture back on Earth, and
to give them a fair shot at what's going on.
We should not have developed our present civilization with its high level of
technology. No, I wasn't. I think you can construct an argument to the effect
that people in other kinds of societies, particularly hunting and gathering
societies, have some things that we don't have. It's not all one-sided.
Civilization is not an unmixed blessing. And people who live in those band
type of societies, they tend to be freer from stress. They tend to have fewer
emotional problems than people who live in societies such as our own. And so I
don't think it's a completely insane argument to say, you know, maybe we'd all
be better off if we were still hunters and gatherers. But no, it's not a
position I would advocate because I don't think it's a, it's not a realistic
proposition outside the world of fantasy. More with Chad Oliver next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson. And Daryl Lane. In a recent science fiction story, Chad
Oliver raises an interesting question. Can man colonize in space? Well, the human
race split into two separate species, spacers and earthers. The story is
entitled, "Meanwhile Back on the Reservation", and has appeared in the 1981
edition of Analog Magazine. As the title suggests, Earth becomes sort of a
reservation containing the backwash of human culture, while the other worlds,
colonized by humans, become the progressive mainstream of mankind's culture. We
asked Oliver if he thought such a situation could occur as we move out into
space. I think it's possible. I think it's possible. Really, the genesis of,
meanwhile, back on the reservation was twofold. And one was simply the kind of
reaction that builds up in you when everybody talks about, hey, you know, here's
the glorious future coming onward to the stars, everybody. When you stop and
realize everybody's not going. And in fact, 99.99% of the human population will
live and die on this planet. And you've got to wonder, well, what about them?
Aren't they people too? And it's anthropological, I think, primarily in the
sense of they're in the same boat that so-called primitive peoples are on this
planet today. That the march of culture, for want of another term, has passed
them by to some extent. And they're sort of islands that are left in the stream
and left behind. And yet they have all the problems of living the face that
anybody else does. And I was just trying to raise the question, well, all right,
what about the people who stay behind? Do we just write them off? Are they
ciphers? Or aren't they just as important as somebody that goes off to Alpha
Centaurus or someplace?
Oliver's been publishing science fiction for over 30 years. And for a good part
of that time, he's lived in Austin, Texas, and taught anthropology at the
University of Texas. Oliver goes on to talk about Meanwhile Back on the
Reservation and reveals some interesting information about his background as a
science fiction writer and also about science fiction writers in Texas. The
other thing that was involved in that story was that I had not written any short
fiction in a while. And I got mixed up with the Turkey City Group in Austin,
which has been a source of untold joy in my life. And a number of people who
were involved in that group, Lisa Tuttle and Howard Waldrop and a number of
others, had urged me to try to do something again, not wait so long between
stories. And meanwhile, back on the reservations, actually the first story I
ever wrote that I submitted to a criticism from other writers. And I learned a
lot from them. And it was a very rewarding experience. And I can't tell you what
a thrill it is for me to be living in some place like Austin and to find a whole
colony of professional science fiction writers there. And not just there, but
the fact that they're so good. You know, for something like 20 years, I was all
alone in Texas. The closest thing there was to a science fiction convention or
gathering in the old days was when Walt Miller and I got together for a six-pack
of beer in Kyle. And this is a brand-new experience for me. And it's comparable
only to the situation I was in when I was in Los Angeles in graduate school. And
Ray Bradbury and Chuck Beaumont and Bill Nolan and Dick Matheson and all of us
would get together and talk about stories. But we never criticized each other's
manuscripts in a more or less formal session like that. Instead, you know,
somebody would write something, and if there was somebody they liked, they'd
take a, hey, look at this, you know, you think I can do anything with it. And
then 20 years more or less by myself, really. More next time with Chad Oliver.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And David Carson. The Shores of Another Sea, Chad Oliver's
1971 science fiction novel, was partially based on the author's experience when
he did some anthropological research in Africa. The novel concerns alien
contact, a standard science fiction theme. The contact is made when some aliens
land in a remote area of Africa. And the aliens are very cautious. They don't
present themselves to humans. They use baboons at first, studying them and
taking over their bodies in order to approach men without being detected. But a
man named Royce Crawford, a scientist studying the baboons, becomes aware of the
aliens' presence. He can't go for help, though, because a storm washes out the
roads and isolates him from civilization. We asked Oliver if the setting was
based on the time he spent in Africa. Yes, it was. The Shores of Another Sea is
at least rooted in the 17 months or so that I spent in Kenya in East Africa when
I was on a research job with a people called the Kamba. And some aspects of The
Shores of Another Sea are real. Some are invented, as is true in any fiction.
But to be specific, the storm and the rains and the isolation that form a major
part of The Shores of Another Sea, that all happened. And I was marooned for a
period of some weeks at what was that? I forget what I called it in the novel. I
may even have used its real name, which was the Derajani Research Station. And
when those rains came down, they simply knocked out all communications. And the
thought just occurred to me. You know, suppose you were going to contact this
Earth and you had to begin somewhere. Would you really plunk your ship down in
the middle of New York City the way they always do? Or would you try it first in
a controllable type of situation where you could deal with small numbers and
related species? And wouldn't it be interesting if you started off with some
other form of primate like a baboon? And that's where The Shores of Another Sea
came from. But if you go back and read the book, or at least if I go back and
look at it, what I see are all kinds of detailed memories of what actually
happened in Kenya, right down to the level of the pipe tobacco I was smoking
there, which was called Sweet Nut and came in a yellow tin and was perfectly
awful.
At one point in the novel, Royce Crawford has a huge water buck in the sights of
his rifle. He's always dreamed of shooting this animal, but he chooses not to.
We asked Oliver if Crawford's decision resulted from his experiences with the
aliens. Sure. The scene in which the would-be hunter finally has a chance to
shoot the animal that he's always dreamed about and elects to let it go free,
that's an analog of what is going on in the rest of the book as well, which is
you have an opportunity or you encounter aliens, and if you simply treat them
the way one human being hopefully might treat another under the best of
circumstances, maybe this kind of encounter is going to hold more promise than
either a situation where they come out with ray guns blasting or one where
there's some involved Machiavellian plot. The notion that I was really playing
around with there was simply maybe the level of communication is going to have
to take place on the level of, look, there's some good in us, there's some good
in you, let's try to find the common ground. This show ends our week with Chad
Oliver. If you're interested in further discussions with him, keep listening to
the Science Fiction Radio Show. We'll be talking with him again in the future.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.